# Emerald Insight

# Social Responsibility Journal

# Sources of variation in linking corporate social responsibility and financial performance

# Ali Quazi Alice Richardson

# Article information:

To cite this document: Ali Quazi Alice Richardson, (2012),"Sources of variation in linking corporate social responsibility and financial performance", Social Responsibility Journal, Vol. 8 Iss 2 pp. 242 - 256

Permanent link to this document: http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/17471111211234860

Downloaded on: 10 February 2015, At: 22:36 (PT)

References: this document contains references to 98 other documents.

To copy this document: permissions@emeraldinsight.com

The fulltext of this document has been downloaded 869 times since 2012*

# Users who downloaded this article also downloaded:

- Vicente Lima Crisóstomo, Fátima de Souza Freire, Felipe Cortes de Vasconcellos, (2011),"Corporate social responsibility, firm value and financial performance in Brazil", Social Responsibility Journal, Vol. 7 Iss 2 pp. 295-309 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/17471111111141549
- Gilbert Lenssen, Lutgart van den Berghe, Céline Louche, Eveline Van de Velde, Wim Vermeir, Filip Corten, (2005),"Corporate social responsibility and financial performance", Corporate Governance: The international journal of business in society, Vol. 5 Iss 3 pp. 129-138 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/14720700510604760
- Li Sun, (2012),"Further evidence on the association between corporate social responsibility and financial performance", International Journal of Law and Management, Vol. 54 Iss 6 pp. 472-484 http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/17542431211281954

Access to this document was granted through an Emerald subscription provided by 540409 []

# For Authors

If you would like to write for this, or any other Emerald publication, then please use our Emerald for Authors service information about how to choose which publication to write for and submission guidelines are available for all. Please visit www.emeraldinsight.com/authors for more information.

# About Emerald

www.emeraldinsight.com

Emerald is a global publisher linking research and practice to the benefit of society. The company manages a portfolio of more than 290 journals and over 2,350 books and book series volumes, as well as providing an extensive range of online products and additional customer resources and services.

Emerald is both COUNTER 4 and TRANSFER compliant. The organization is a partner of the Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE) and also works with Portico and the LOCKSS initiative for digital archive preservation.

*Related content and download information correct at time of download.

# Sources of variation in linking corporate social responsibility and financial performance

# Ali Quazi and Alice Richardson

Ali Quazi is an Associate Professor in the Faculty of Business and Government, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia. Alice Richardson is an Assistant Professor in the Faculty of Information Sciences and Engineering, University of Canberra, Canberra, Australia.

# Abstract

Purpose – This purpose of this paper is to identify the possible sources of variation of results in prior studies linking corporate social responsibility (CSR) with corporate financial performance (CFP).

Design/methodology/approach – A meta-analysis was performed on 51 prior studies included in Orlitzky et al. in order to ensure compatibility with previous results. The meta-analysis is based on sub-groups of papers in five-year time intervals focusing on sample size and methodology employed as the sources of variation concerning the nexus between CSR and CFP.

Findings – The major finding of the study is that sample size and methodology are significant sources of variation in measuring the link between CSR and CFP.

Research limitations/implications – The findings are likely to help develop a structural framework towards broadening and deepening our understanding of the debate regarding the sources of variation in the measurement of CSR and CFP link. This research is limited to papers published up to 1999 as included in Orlitzky et al. Future research can update the findings by using data beyond 1999.

Originality/value – This paper can be considered an advance on the previous research as it contributes to broadening our understanding of the possible source of causes of variation in results of studies linking CSR with CFP.

Keywords Corporate social responsibility, Financial performance, Meta analysis, Profitability, Sub-group analysis, Company performance

Paper type Research paper

# 1. Introduction

Research into corporate social responsibility (CSR) has generated considerable interest amongst academic and practitioners over the past decades. The issue has gained renewed momentum in the post global financial crisis era. For the purpose of this paper CSR is defined as those responsibilities that corporations undertake to satisfy organisational goals as well as societal needs in a balanced way that serves the interests of both businesses and the community. Various facets of CSR have been researched in the past. These include, for example, managerial attitudes towards CSR (Quazi, 2003), theoretical aspects of CSR and ethics (Hunt and Vitell, 1984), cross-cultural facets of CSR (Quazi and O’Brien, 2000), CSR and quality of life (Rugimbana et al., 2008), and CSR and competitive advantage (Porter and Krammer, 2005). However, one particular issue concerning the relationship between CSR and the financial performance of firms has generated enormous interest amongst academics, policy makers and practitioners (Ullmann, 1985; Marom, 2006). The issue is that businesses and practitioners would like to see a business case to justify their commitment to CSR. Numerous empirical studies aimed at finding a possible answer to the question have produced mixed results (Peloza and Papania, 2008), most of which are neither straightforward nor conclusive (Griffin and Mahon, 1997; Marom, 2006). In the theoretical vein, two contrasting models have been suggested. One is rooted in the positive impact of corporate social performance (CSP) on corporate financial performance (CFP).

while the other is based on the assumption that increased costs resulting from CSP put participant businesses in a disadvantageous position as compared to those that do not support CSR. While differing methodologies and statistical techniques have been held responsible for the lack of a consistent pattern of outcomes, an alternative approach to resolve this impasse has not been suggested in the literature. Although a few meta analyses have partially contributed to possible solutions to the issue, these results have not ultimately revealed any conclusive evidence either (e.g. Orlitzky and Benjamin, 2001; Orlitzky et al., 2003, Grifﬁn and Mahon, 1997; Frooman, 1997; Wood and Jones, 1995). This apparent lacuna in the literature has prompted our meta analysis to uncover some possible sources of variation in the outcomes of 51 of the studies that Orlitzky et al. (2003) used in their meta-analysis. Our meta-analysis re-examines some of the issues that Orlitzky et al. (2003) did not speciﬁcally look at in detail. Some factors were considered and discarded for this study. For example, industry (see Cowen et al., 1987) was discarded because insufﬁcient detail is provided in the table showing effect sizes in Orlitzky et al.’s (2003) paper. Firm size (see Orlitzky, 2001) was also discarded because individual data was not available for all the ﬁrms in the studies included in Orlitzky’s (2001) paper. Finally, country (see Quazi and O’Brien, 2000) was discarded because most studies in Orlitzky et al. (2003) were US-based. Size of sample used, statistical techniques employed and the timing of publications of the papers are all available for consideration as factors. The above three propositions were arrived at based on the available characteristics of the literature, particularly those included in Ortlitzky et al. CFP. We wish to derive a statistical measure of whether there has been any movement towards a consensus over time. Sample size is a key determinant of precision, and while Orlitzky et al. (2003) provide sample sizes, the authors carry out no further analysis of them. Researchers have used a variety of statistical techniques in their research and we wish to determine whether the choice of technique has an impact on the strength of the relationship. Time is used to subdivide studies by Grifﬁn and Mahon (1997). Sample size is provided by Orlitzky et al. (2003). Firm size is also suggested as a possible confounding variable by Orlitzky (2001). In a similar way, we examine the magnitude of the effect of sample size on effect size. Since sample size is an element of the formula for effect size, we know a priori that sample size inﬂuences affect size. Our analysis helps us to determine what the magnitude of the effect is.

To our knowledge, the effect of statistical methodology has not been studied previously. Our concern is that a restricted number of statistical techniques have been used to study the relationship between CSR and CFP and that this narrow focus on correlation, t-tests and regression may not model the complete relationship. It is to be noted that this paper includes those previous studies that looked at the relationship between CSR and ﬁnancial performance of ﬁrms in speciﬁc terms and this principle has been followed throughout the analysis process of our meta-research.

# 2. Literature review

The question of whether there is any relationship between CSR and CFP has led to lively debate amongst academics and researchers since the 1960s (Cochran and Wood, 1984). Does social responsibility pay off? Can a ﬁrm that exercises social responsibility make higher proﬁts than one that does not? Are socially responsible ﬁrms good investment risks? These are some of the typical questions raised in the literature and addressed in several studies; these have expressed contrasting views based on research ﬁndings about the possible relationship between a ﬁrm’s social responsibility and its ﬁnancial performance. For example, McGuire et al. (1988) reported three different views on this point, which can be reclassiﬁed into two meaningful models presented earlier in this paper. The ﬁrst is that ﬁrms “face a trade-off between social responsibility and ﬁnancial performance”. This view is based on the argument that socially responsible ﬁrms are economically in a more disadvantageous position than those who are less responsible as a result of the cost incurred by the former for their socially responsible actions (Preston and O’Bannon, 1997; Aupperle et al., 1985; Ullmann, 1985; Vance, 1975; Preston and O’Bannon, 1997). The second view, which is in sharp contrast to the

VOL. 8 NO. 2 2012 jSOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY JOURNAL j PAGE 243

First, is that a firm may benefit from being socially responsible as it leads to increased employee morale and improved productivity (Moskowitz, 1972; Parket and Eilbirt, 1975). The cost of social responsibility may be high but can be offset by the reductions in other firm costs such as legal expenses, worker compensation costs, product replacement costs and the like (Herremans et al., 1993). A further contemporary view strongly suggests that there is a nexus between CSR and competitive advantage in terms of building a unique image of the firm in the market. A firm can build this image through CSR orientation and use that unique image as a differentiated strategy to increase its competitiveness in the market over non-CSR oriented firms (Porter and Krammer, 2004).

There is also a CSR perspective rooted in the moral principle which suggests that corporations should be socially responsible simply because it is the right thing to do irrespective of the financial outcome of that socially responsible action. This perspective is underpinned by deontological philosophy, which assesses an action or behaviour in terms of its inherent rightness or wrongness and does not take into account the nature and extent of outcome of that action (Frankena, 1973).

Overall, the literature on the relationship between CSR and CFP is inconclusive. Several issues have been held responsible for the lack of a consensus. These include inconsistent methodologies (Griffin and Mahon, 1997), misspecification of models (Ullmann, 1985), inclusion of confounding factors (Margolis and Walsh, 2003), and the lack of clarity of both CSR (Griffin, 2000) and CFP (Margolis and Walsh, 2003) variables. Ullmann (1985) summarised the findings of 12 studies as showing no clear tendency. A mixture of positive, negative and no correlation outcomes were observed. The findings regarding the relationship between social responsibility and financial performance ranged from no correlation to various significant positive or negative linear relationships (Ullmann, 1985).

Orlitzky et al. (2003) included 52 papers published from 1974 to 1999 and found a similar pattern of outcomes. Mill (2006) lists six meta-analyses from 1995-2005, spanning articles published from 1970 to 2002. It is to be noted here that there does not appear to be any research to date on the existence of possible curvilinear relationships.

Most studies of the relationship between CSR and CFP have used a regression model, correlation analysis, or a t-test. Only a few papers have used a different methodology. For example, Mill (2006) adopted a mixture of a case-control study and a longitudinal study over a four-year period and found that firms with a positive commitment to CSR recorded better financial outcomes as compared to those with no commitment to CSR. This implies that firms that have invested in CSR in programs have, in financial terms, achieved a higher level of gains.

Wu (2006) conducted a meta-analysis of 121 papers that were published prior to 2000 using subset analyses by definition of CSR, definition of CFP and firm size. In general Wu found a positive relationship between CSR and CFP. Wu also found that the relationship between CSR and CFP tended to weaken when analysis was conducted by the subgroups mentioned above. In a discussion paper, Chand (2006) pointed to an important issue by advocating the use of industry as a factor.

Most of the findings reported in the literature suggest that the correlation between corporate social responsibility and financial performance is generally positive. However, it would not be wise to conclude that the tendency is towards a positive relationship. There are a number of reasons for this reservation. These include the identification of CSR as an “elusive concept” (Lee, 1987) and the use of “poor experiments, unfortunate use of proxies, inappropriate mathematics or controls, and so forth” (Cottrill, 1990).

# 3. The rationale, scope and objectives of the research

Following the recent collapse of a number of corporations at the international level, ethics and CSR have attracted the renewed attention of boardroom barons as well as other stakeholders such as investors, creditors, legislators, politicians and the general public. While numerous aspects of CSR and ethics have been addressed in the contemporary business literature, a vital question remains unresolved. That is, to link the effects of being ethical and socially responsible to the financial performance of firms. The main reason

behind the difﬁculty of ﬁnding a clear-cut answer to the question is that research in this area has used a variety of methodologies, measurement scales and statistical methods. This has made the results debatable, and consequently no consensus has been reached. In response, some authors such as Orlitzky et al. (2003) attempted to resolve the issue using meta-analyses of results.

In view of the above, this paper is aimed towards contributing to the arrival of a possible consensus on this issue. In reaching towards the aim we have employed a sub-group meta-analysis of the results of the studies identiﬁed by Orlitzky et al. (2003). More speciﬁcally, we have conducted a number of meta-analyses of the results of studies by date of publication, sample size and statistical methodology. The aim was to ﬁnd out whether the differences in methodologies and statistical method have made any contribution to the impasse relating to the nexus between CSR and ﬁnancial performance of ﬁrms.

# 4. Methodology

A meta-analysis is used as a method of investigation for this research. Meta-analysis is an advanced technique used to combine the results of a number of studies in order to gain a better overall picture of the underlying relationships between the variable of interest in relation to a particular study. In the past, researchers simply carried out a textual analysis of studies, or applied a simple vote-counting procedure in an attempt to determine the overall nature of the relationship(s). Glass (1976) published one of the ﬁrst meta-analysis procedures for combining effect sizes in a statistically appropriate manner (Hunter et al., 1982). Meta-analysis has since been used in many studies and by now it has emerged as a useful statistical technique in terms of combining the results of a number of studies; especially in clinical trials (for example, see www.cochrane.org). Similar systematic reviews in the ﬁelds of education, crime and justice and social welfare are published by the Campbell Collaboration (see www.campbellcollaboration.org).

For the purpose of this paper we have based our meta-analysis on 51 of the papers included in Orlitzky et al.’s (2003) meta analysis. This meta analysis is the latest study in this particular area. In their abstract, Orlitzky et al. (2003) referred to 51 papers and an overall positive effect of CSR on CFP, although the effect was moderated by the deﬁnitions of CSR and CFP used in each paper. The authors provided year of publication, effect size and sample size for the 51 papers used in their original analysis. These 51 papers form the basis of our analysis for the current paper. We have decided to conﬁne our analysis to the 51 papers in order to maintain consistency with the previous work as well as to be able to compare some of the results of our meta-analysis with those of prior studies. This means that this paper will speciﬁcally focus on deﬁnitions of corporate ﬁnancial performance as used by the 51 papers that have been included in this meta-analysis ranging from return on asset (ROA) to return on investment (ROI).

As can be seen in Table I, many of the studies included in Orlitzky et al.’s (2003) meta analysis provided more than one effect size. This can be due to multiple measures of CSR and CFP, or other ways of subdividing the data. For example Davidson and Worrell (1992) report results for several different types of product recall. Herremans et al. (1993) report results across a number of years. Simerly (1994) uses seven different measures of CFP and O’Neill et al. (1989) use four different measures of CSR. In some cases it even turned out that some of the effect sizes were positive and some were negative. If this occurred, then the entry in column 4 of Table I is recorded as ‘‘variable’’. This is because the results were not consistent in their direction.

Because of the variety of effect sizes available within individual studies, in this paper we have analysed and presented the results of our meta-analysis using three choices of effect size. Firstly, we deﬁned the most pessimistic effect. The pessimistic effect refers to the effect size that is closest to zero, or equal to zero provided the effect sizes in a particular study range from positive to negative. Secondly, we deﬁned the most optimistic effect in a positive direction. The most optimistic positive effect refers to the effect size closest to 1.0 in a particular study. Third, we deﬁned the most optimistic effect in a negative direction. The most optimistic negative effect is the effect size closest to -1.0 in a particular study. The rules for obtaining these three effect sizes from the range of effect sizes in a particular paper is shown in Table II.

VOL. 8 NO. 2 2012 jSOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY JOURNAL j PAGE 245

# Table I

# Nature of correlation revealed in the papers included in Orlitzky et al.’s (2003) meta analysis along with the method of analysis used

|Name of authors|Date|Method|Nature of correlation found|Comments (selected nature of CSP and CFP)|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Abbott and Monsen|1979|t-test|Positive|D and ROI|
|Alexander and Buchholz|1978|Correlation|Variable|R and market return|
|Anderson and Frankle|1980|t-test|Variable|D and stock returns|
|Aupperle et al.|1985|Mixed|Variable|CSR1 and ROA|
|Balkaoui|1976|T-test|Variable|SA/P/O and market return|
|Blackburn et al.|1994|Correlation|Variable|SA/P/O and market return|
|Bowman|1978|t-test|Positive|CSR1 and n/a|
|Bowman and Haire|1975|Mixed|Positive|D and ROSBTA|
|Bragdon and Marlin|1972|Correlation|Positive|D and ROE|
|Brown and Perry|1995|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O and ROE|
|Chen and Metcalf|1980|Correlation|Variable|SA/P/O and profitability|
|Cochran and Wood|1984|t-test|Positive|R and market valuation|
|Conine and Madden|1987|Correlation|Positive|R and perceptual survey measures|
|Cowen et al.|1987|Correlation|Variable|D and ROE|
|Davidson and Worrell|1992|t-test|Variable|D and security returns|
|Dooley and Lerner|1994|Correlation|Positive|CSR1 and ROA|
|Fogler and Nutt|1975|Correlation|Negative|SA/P/O and P/E ratio|
|Fombrun and Shanley|1990|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O and ROIC|
|Freedman and Jaggi|1982|Correlation|Variable|D and ROA|
|Freedman and Jaggi|1986|t-test|Variable|D and market return|
|Graves and Waddock|1994|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O and ROA|
|Greening|1995|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O, R and ROA|
|Griffin and Mahon|1997|Correlation|Variable|SA/P/O, R and ROA|
|Hansen and Wernerfelt|1989|Correlation|Positive|CSR1 and ROA|
|Heinze|1976|Correlation|Variable|R and ROA|
|Herremans et al.|1993|Correlation|Variable|R and market return|
|Ingram|1978|t-test|Variable|D and portfolio return|
|Kedia and Kuntz|1981|Correlation|Variable|SA/P/O and ROA|
|Levy and Shatto|1980|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O and net income|
|McGuire et al.|1988|Correlation|Variable|R and ROA|
|Newgren et al.|1985|t-test|Variable|SA/P/O and P/E ratio|
|O’Neill et al.|1989|Correlation|Variable|CSR1 and ROA|
|Parket and Eilbirt|1975|t-test|Positive|Questionnaire and ROE|
|Patten|1990|t-test|Variable|D and market returns|
|Pava and Krausz|1995|t-test|Variable|SA/P/O and market return|
|Preston|1987|t-test|Positive|D and market return|
|Reimann|1975|Correlation|Positive|CSR1 and survey measures|
|Roberts|1992|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O and ROA|
|Russo and Fouts|1997|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O and ROA|
|Shane and Spicer|1983|t-test|Variable|SA/P/O and returns|
|Simerly|1994|t-test|Positive|R and ROI|
|Simerly|1995|t-test|Positive|R and ROE|
|Spencer and Taylor|1987|Correlation|Variable|R and ROA|
|Spicer|1978|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O and ROE|
|Starik|1990|Correlation|Variable|SA/P/O and ROI|
|Sturdivant and Ginter|1977|Correlation|Positive|R and EPS growth|
|Turban and Greening|1997|Correlation|Variable|SA/P/O, R and ROA|
|Vance|1975|Correlation|Negative|R and share price|
|Waddock and Graves|1997|Correlation|Positive|SA/P/O and ROA|
|Wartick|1988|t-test|Positive|SA/P/O and survey measures|
|Woktuch and Spencer|1987|t-test|Positive|SA/P/O and ROA|

Notes: Codes for corporate social responsibility (CSR): D, disclosures; R, reputational indices; SA/P/O, social audit, process and outcome measures; CSR1, Aupperle’s and others’ measures of corporate principle and values. Codes for corporate financial performance (CFP): ROA, return on assets; ROE, return on equity; ROI, return on investment; P/E ratio, price/earnings ratio. An actual count of the papers that Orlitzky et al. (2003) included in their meta-analysis revealed that 51 of the papers had effects sizes recorded, hence 51 papers have been included in our meta-analysis.

We carried out our meta-analyses using these three choices of effect size in order to see the impact on the meta analyses that results from the different effect sizes reported in each of the prior studies (i.e. the 51 studies).

|Effect size|Pessimistic|Optimistic positive|Optimistic negative|
|---|---|---|---|
|Between 2x and 2y|0|0|2x|
|Between 2x and y|0|y|2x|
|Between x and y|x|y|x|

It is to be noted that in some cases, a range of sample sizes is also provided in the papers listed above (Table I). For our paper the smallest sample size will be used for the relevant analysis. This choice leads to a ‘‘worst-case’’ contribution to the meta analysis. Our results could then be even stronger if the larger sample size was taken into consideration for the relevant analysis.

Based on the above discussion, the following propositions are presented for testing:

- P1. Year of publication of the papers will have an effect on the strength of the relationship between CSR on CFP.
- P2. Sample size of the concerned studies will have an effect on the strength of the relationship between CSR on CFP.
- P3. Statistical techniques used will have an effect on the strength of the relationship between CSR on CFP.

# 5. Results of meta-analysis (1974-1999)

As mentioned earlier, our meta-analysis has examined the relationships between CSR and the financial performance of firms focusing on the following aspects: five-year time intervals, sample size and methodology employed.

# 5.1 Meta analysis by five-year time intervals

We propose that time (year) of publication of the concerned studies has an effect on the results of the studies. Orlitzky et al.’s (2003) meta analysis involves 51 papers published between the period 1974-1999. In order to maintain a reasonable number of papers in each time interval, while still having a reasonably large number of time intervals, we decided to group the years of publication of the concerned papers into five-year intervals, starting in 1970. It has been assumed that the year of publication is closely related to the year(s) in which the study data was collected. Confidence intervals for the effect size by five-year time intervals can be seen in Table II. These intervals were calculated using the Hedges method described by Field (2005, pp. 301-3). In this method effect sizes are converted to standard normal variates, then their weighted average is calculated. The weights are based on the within-study and between-study variance of the studies. A confidence interval for the overall effect size is then found using the normal distribution, and a formula for the standard error of the mean effect size. Three intervals are shown for this purpose. The pessimistic interval uses the effect size closest to zero defined earlier in Table II. The optimistic positive interval used the most positive effect size defined in Table II. Finally, the optimistic negative interval uses the most negative effect size defined in Table II.

The results revealed that with the passage of five-year periods, the results tend to become more precise (confidence intervals become generally narrower). Furthermore, with the passage of time the meta-analysis estimate of effect size also tends to be more positive. In other words, it can be said that the results of the more recent studies have higher interpretive value. The conclusion that can be drawn from this finding is that the quality of studies in terms of precision and strength has improved as time progressed.

The half-decade intervals used are standard in time series analysis (e.g. Cochran and Wood, 1984). Neither two-year nor ten-year intervals provided a better indication of the change in quality as time progressed (see Table III).

VOL. 8 NO. 2 2012 jSOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY JOURNAL j PAGE 247

# Table III Meta analysis of effect size by year

|Year|95 per cent CI (pessimistic)|95 per cent CI (optimistic positive)|95 per cent CI (optimistic negative)|Number of papers|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|1970-1974|–a|–a|–a|1|
|1975-1979|[20.03, 0.15]|[0.03, 0.77]|[20.19, 0.19]|14|
|1980-1984|[20.12, 0.47]|[0.21, 0.91]|[20.51, 0.43]|7|
|1985-1989|[0.00, 0.35]|[0.17, 0.53]|[20.07, 0.32]|11|
|1990-1994|[20.02, 0.08]|[0.14, 0.53]|[20.34, 20.03]|10|
|1995-1999|[0.03, 0.22]|[0.24, 0.56]|[0.00, 0.21]|12|
|Total|51|51|51|51|

Note: Only one study: n ¼ 12, r ¼ 0:22

The above results make sense because as time progresses it is to be expected that firms will improve their ability to implement CSR from a strategic viewpoint. Therefore, the likelihood of firms experiencing positive financial outcomes from CSR will increase leading to greater engagement with CSR in the long term.

# 5.2 Meta analysis by sample size

We propose that sample size has an effect on the results of the studies. Orlitzky et al. (2003) listed the sample sizes in each of the 51 papers. In some cases, a range of sample sizes is provided. We have used the smallest sample size in each case to ensure that our results reflect the weakest outcome possible. The intervals for the sample size were chosen to ensure that there were a similar number of studies in each interval. They also show a broadly exponential increase in the upper limit of the sample sizes (see Table IV).

As the sample size increases, the confidence intervals generally become narrower and the effects generally become more positive. The conclusion that can be drawn from this finding is that the quality of studies in terms of precision and strength improves as sample size increases. This result makes sense, as it is a general statistical property of estimators that they become more precise as the sample size increases.

# 5.3 Meta analysis by methodology

We propose that the method of analysis has an impact on effect size. Orlitzky et al. (2003) record the measure of CSR and CFP used in each paper, and whether the effect size was derived from a correlation or from a t statistic (see Table V).

The intervals using t-tests are always wider than the intervals using correlation. This could suggest that correlation methods give more precise results. It may also be simply due to the fact that there are more correlation studies. Furthermore, one of the studies revealed an effect size very close to 1.00, which may skew the results in favour of the correlation methodology.

We looked at the original papers to see if more detail on the method of analysis was available. Our searches located 34 of the 51 papers. Of these, only two studies used

# Table IV Meta analysis of effect size by sample size

|Sample size|95 per cent CI (pessimistic)|95 per cent CI (optimistic positive)|95 per cent CI (optimistic negative)|Number of papers|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|,10|[0.85, 0.98]|[0.33, 0.74]|[20.37, 0.54]|8|
|10-19|[20.03, 0.31]|[0.27, 0.68]|[20.27, 0.23]|10|
|20-49|[20.07, 0.33]|[0.16, 0.81]|[20.51, 0.25]|7|
|50-99|[0.01, 0.39]|[0.22, 0.52]|[20.07, 0.37]|9|
|100-199|[20.02, 0.23]|[0.17, 0.53]|[20.06, 0.21]|13|
|200 +|[0.03, 0.12]|[0.14, 0.18]|[0.03, 0.12]|4|
|Total|51|51|51|51|

# Table V

# Meta analysis of effect size by methodology employed

|Method|95 per cent CI (pessimistic)|No. of papers|95 per cent CI (optimistic positive)|No. of papers|95 per cent CI (optimistic negative)|No. of papers|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Correlation|[0.05, 0.21]|34|[0.24, 0.41]|33|[20.02, 0.17]|32|
|t-test|[0.02, 0.23]|17|[0.34, 0.77]|18|[20.17, 0.17]|19|
|Total|51|51|51|51|51|51|

Methods other than correlation, regression or two-sample tests. These were MANOVA and binomial tests. The effects were found to be generally positive. In terms of the width of the confidence intervals, they appear to become wider as consideration shifts from correlation and t tests and other methods. This may simply be due to the much smaller number of studies using other methodologies.

Our objective here is not to assess which methodology gives the best estimate of effect size in an absolute sense, but to compare the relative performance of methodologies employed. Our conclusion showed that the papers in the meta-analysis that employ t-tests resulted in a wider confidence interval for the effect size than papers employing correlations. Our results do not indicate which methodology provides results that are closest to the true effect size. The results do indicate that t-tests provided more consistent results than other methodologies for the papers in the meta-analysis.

# 6. Modelling the effect of year, sample size and methodology on effect size

The varying confidence intervals in the meta-analyses above suggest that a model relating effect size to sample size, year and method will reveal which of these three factors has the strongest impact on effect size. Our model is based on a multiple linear regression where sample size is a scale variable, time is a categorical variable measured in five-year intervals, and method is a categorical variable in two categories.

Once the regression model has been fitted using least squares in SPSS, it is possible to carry out an analysis of variance (ANOVA) to assess the relative importance of sample size, year, and method in determining effect size. The ANOVA based on the optimistic positive effect sizes is shown in Table VI.

The p-values in the last column of Table VI shows that the effect of time (five-year intervals) is not significant (p = 0.4187). However the effect of sample size is significant at the 5 per cent level (p = 0.0142), and the effect of method is also significant at the 5 per cent level (p = 0.0157). We therefore suggest that more attention be paid to increasing the sample size and choosing a powerful statistical method when designing future research on CSR.

It is noteworthy that Orlitzky (2001) studied whether the association between CSR and CFP is caused by the confounding effect of firm size. The author found that controlling for firm size still results in a positive association between CSR and CFP. Also, Orlitzky and Benjamin (2001) subdivided a meta-analysis by definition of CSR and definition of CFP. They operationalised CFP as firm risk and then further subdivided that into accounting risk and market risk. They subdivided CSR into CSP disclosures, CSP reputation indices and socials audits as well as CSR1 (see notes to Table I).

# Table VI

# Analysis of variance

|Source|df|Sum of squares|Mean square|F-value|p-value|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Sample size|1|0.4769|0.4679|6.5365|0.0142|
|Time (five-year intervals)|5|0.3716|0.0743|1.0186|0.4187|
|Method|1|0.4618|0.4618|6.3289|0.0157|

VOL. 8 NO. 2 2012 jSOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY JOURNAL j PAGE 249

# 7. Discussion and implications

This paper has reported on three additional aspects of the relationship between CSR and CFP not explicitly covered by Orlitzky et al. (2003). We based our meta-analyses on Orlitzky et al. (2003) in order to maintain consistency with their work so that any additional findings can contribute to furthering our understanding of the elements that are causing the variation. We therefore expect that our work will prompt further research into the factors influencing the effect size on CSR and CFP. The three additional factors reported in this paper were sample size, year of publication and statistical methodology. Our meta-analysis revealed sample size and statistical methodology to be important sources of variation in the relationship between CSR and CFP followed by year of publication.

Combining sample size and statistical methodology suggests that the overall study design is an important factor influencing study effect. An implication of this is that a structural framework of the relationship between CSR and CFP and the variables that may moderate and mediate such a relationship may be effective in capturing many aspects of the relationship. An initial interpretation of the results of our meta analysis provide some important clues as to a possible structural framework capturing some important aspects of CSR and their outcomes in terms of some specification of financial performance. These specifications include variables such as profit, market share, share price, ROI and so on.

Research has also found culture to be a possible moderating factor (Pesqueux, 2005; Maignan, 2001; Quazi and O’Brien, 2000). Marom (2006) proposes a mathematical model and also suggests some mediating variables including the level of corporate reputation, the degree of business risk and the level of support of regulatory bodies. Peters and Mullen (2009) include firm size and industry as variables in their model of CSR and CFP. These variables are also considered critical, as they are likely to affect the level of CFP. Industry type and national cultures are also considered instrumental in understanding the relationship between CSR and CFP and these variables have been picked up by prior studies (Kim and Kim, 2010; Vitell et al., 2003; Maignan, 2001; Quazi and O’Brien, 2000). However, whether some other moderating or mediating factors would be relevant in the realm of the relationship is the subject of more comprehensive future studies.

In order to set up the proposed framework, new data would be needed in order to broaden our understanding of the complexities of the relationship in the context of the dynamism of the issues of CSR and CFP. For example, the current global financial crisis is about to upset much conventional wisdom that has dominated academic thought over the past half century since the global depression of the 1930s. Therefore, we are keen to extend the framework in terms of time scale into the last ten years (2000-2009) and beyond in our next study. This would then update and advance the knowledge beyond what Orlitzky et al. (2003) covered in their studies for the period 1974-1999. We would also be keen to study the effect of national culture on effect size. The current studies are exclusively based in the USA, and there has been considerable work in the past few years in the context of other countries or regions including Australia, Japan (Okamoto, 2009), Taiwan (Shen and Chang, 2009), China (Wang and Juslin, 2009) and Spain (Sanchez and Sotorrio, 2007). These studies should also be included in future research in order to develop a universal framework for understanding the link between CSR and CFP.

# 8. Limitations and future research

This paper has some limitations that should be noted. Firstly, industry has not been included as a factor in the meta-analysis. Future research should aim to examine the possible impact of this factor on CFP. Secondly, we have confined our meta-analysis to the papers included in Orlitzky et al. (2003) before 1999. Future research can update this time frame beyond 1999. Thirdly, it has been assumed that the year of publication is closely related to the year(s) in which the study data was collected. In the worst case, the study data will lag a few years behind the publication date, which will reduce the impact of time on the relationship between CSR and CFP. Future research can take account of this lag or avoid it by using study data dates as a factor. Fourthly, typologies of ways of measuring CSR and CFP would greatly assist future research in this area. Such a typology would allow researchers to connect CSR to various types of financial performance, for example ROI, ROA, ROE and the price/earnings ratio.

Future research can also link the measurement of firms’ commitment to CSR using the triple bottom line as the theoretical underpinning (Elkington, 1997). The three bottom lines are the social, economic and environmental obligations of corporations. Next, the relationship between sustainability and CSR commitment of firms can also be explored in future research that links these two to CFP.

Finally, we strongly suggest that future researchers should consider a wider variety of statistical methodologies when studying the effect of CSR on CFP. Only two papers out of 34 employed methods other than the very traditional t-tests and regression. Whilst it is perfectly sensible to use a t-test or regression when the data and research questions call for them, our results do show that methodology has a significant effect on effect size. Therefore, we propose that the use of a wider range of methodologies may help answer important questions about the relationship between CSR and CFP.

# 9. Conclusion

To summarise, we carried out a sub-group meta-analysis of studies investigating the extent of the relationship between CSR and CFP. While individual studies have found a relationship that varies from strongly positive to strongly negative, a meta-analysis conducted by Orlitzky et al. (2003) found that the overall effect was moderately positive. Our re-analysis by sub-groups according to sample size, year of publication and methodology shows that the effect of time is not a significant factor in determining the effect size. However, sample size and statistical technique play an important role in determining the link between CSR and CFP. By combining these two factors, we can conclude that research methodology can be singled out as the major source of variation in the strength of the relationship between CSR and CFP.

Identifying this major source of variation in the measurement of links between CSR and CFP will contribute to the refinement of the measurement process in further research. More specifically, this sub-group meta-analysis can be considered as an advancement over the previous meta analysis in that our analysis identified more specific contributing factors towards resolving the controversy regarding the acceptance of CSR as a viable business choice. This research will also contribute to future modelling of the effect of CSR on CFP. New important variables have been identified, and others gathered together from existing literature as a guide to future modelling processes.

# References

Aupperle, K.E., Carroll, A.B. and Hatfield, J.D. (1985), ‘‘An empirical investigation of the relationship between corporate social responsibility and profitability’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 28, pp. 446-63.

Chand, M. (2006), ‘‘The relationship between corporate social performance and corporate financial performance: industry type as a boundary condition’’, The Business Review, Cambridge, Vol. 5, pp. 240-5.

Cochran, P.L. and Wood, R.A. (1984), ‘‘Corporate social responsibility and financial performance’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 27, pp. 42-56.

Cottrill, M.T. (1990), ‘‘Corporate social responsibility and the marketplace’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 9, pp. 723-9.

Cowen, S.S., Ferreri, L.B. and Parker, L.D. (1987), ‘‘The impact of corporate social responsibility on social responsibility disclosure: a typology and frequency-based analysis’’, Accounting, Organisations and Society, Vol. 12, pp. 111-22.

Davidson, W.N. III and Worrell, D.L. (1992), ‘‘Research notes and communications: the effect of product recall announcements on shareholder wealth’’, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 13, pp. 467-73.

Elkington, J. (1997), Cannibals with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of Twenty First Century Business, Capstone, Oxford.

Field, A.P. (2005), ‘‘Meta-analysis’’, in Miles, J. and Gilbert, P. (Eds), A Handbook of Research Methods for Clinical and Health Psychology, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.

# References

Frankena, W.K. (1973), Ethics, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Frooman, J. (1997), ‘‘Socially irresponsible and illegal behavior and shareholder wealth’’, Business and Society, Vol. 36, pp. 221-49.

Glass, G.V. (1976), ‘‘Primary, secondary and meta-analysis of research’’, Review of Research in Education, Vol. 5, pp. 351-79.

Grifﬁn, J. (2000), ‘‘Corporate social performance: research directions for the 21st century’’, Business and Society, Vol. 39, pp. 479-91.

Grifﬁn, J.J. and Mahon, J.F. (1997), ‘‘The corporate social performance and corporate ﬁnancial performance debate: twenty-ﬁve years of incomparable research’’, Business and Society, Vol. 36, pp. 5-31.

Herremans, I.M., Akathaporn, P. and McInnes, M. (1993), ‘‘An investigation of corporate social responsibility reputation and economic performance’’, Accounting, Organisations and Society, Vol. 18, pp. 587-604.

Hunt, S.D. and Vitell, S. (1986), ‘‘A general theory of marketing ethics’’, Journal of Macromarketing, Vol. 6, pp. 5-16.

Hunter, J.E., Schmidt, F.L. and Jackson, G.B. (1982), Meta-analysis: Cumulating Research Findings across Studies, Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, CA.

Kim, Y. and Kim, S. (2010), ‘‘The inﬂuence of cultural values on perceptions of corporate social responsibility: application of Hofstede’s dimensions to Korean public relations practitioners’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 91, pp. 485-500.

Lee, L.J. (1987), ‘‘Social responsibility and economic performance: an empirical examination of corporate proﬁles’’, unpublished doctoral dissertation, United States International University, San Diego, CA.

McGuire, J.B., Sundgren, A. and Schneeweis, T. (1988), ‘‘Corporate social responsibility and ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 31, pp. 854-72.

Maignan, I. (2001), ‘‘Consumers’ perceptions of corporate social responsibilities: a cross-cultural comparison’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 30, pp. 57-72.

Margolis, J.D. and Walsh, J.P. (2003), ‘‘Misery loves companies: rethinking social initiatives by business’’, Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 48, pp. 268-305.

Marom, I.Y. (2006), ‘‘Towards a uniﬁed theory of the CSP-CFP link’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 67, pp. 191-200.

Mill, G. (2006), ‘‘The ﬁnancial performance of a socially responsible investment over time and a possible link with corporate social responsibility’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 63, pp. 131-48.

Moskowitz, M.R. (1972), ‘‘Choosing socially responsible stocks’’, Business and Society Review, Vol. 13, pp. 29-42.

O’Neill, H.M., Saunders, C.B. and McCarthy, A.D. (1989), ‘‘Board members, corporate social responsiveness and proﬁtability: are tradeoffs necessary?’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 8, pp. 353-7.

Okamoto, D. (2009), ‘‘Social relationship of a ﬁrm and the CSP-CFP relationship in Japan: using artiﬁcial neural networks’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 87, pp. 117-32.

Orlitzky, M. (2001), ‘‘Does ﬁrm size confound the relationship between corporate social performance and ﬁrm ﬁnancial performance?’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 33, pp. 167-80.

Orlitzky, M. and Benjamin, J.D. (2001), ‘‘Corporate social performance and ﬁrm risk: a meta-analytic review’’, Business and Society, Vol. 40, pp. 369-96.

Orlitzky, M., Schmidt, F.L. and Rynes, S.L. (2003), ‘‘Corporate social and ﬁnancial performance: a meta-analysis’’, Organisation Studies, Vol. 24, pp. 403-41.

Parket, I.R. and Eilbirt, H. (1975), ‘‘Social responsibility: the underlying factors’’, Business Horizons, Vol. 18, pp. 5-10.

Peloza, J. and Papania, L. (2008), ‘‘The missing link between corporate social responsibility and financial performance: stakeholder silence and identiﬁcation’’, Corporate Reputation Review, Vol. 11, pp. 169-81.

# References

Pesqueux, Y. (2005), ‘‘An ‘Anglo-American’ model of CSR?’’, in Bonnafous-Boucher, M. and Pesqueux, Y. (Eds), Stakeholder Theory: A European Perspective, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, pp. 24-38.

Peters, R. and Mullen, M.R. (2009), ‘‘Some evidence of the cumulative effect of corporate social responsibility on financial performance’’, Journal of Global Business Issues, Vol. 3, pp. 1-14.

Porter, M.E. and Kramer, M.R. (2002), ‘‘The competitive advantage of corporate philanthropy’’, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 80, pp. 56-65.

Preston, L.E. and O’Bannon, D.P. (1997), ‘‘The corporate social-financial performance relationship: a typology and analysis’’, Business and Society, Vol. 36, pp. 419-29.

Quazi, A.M. (2003), ‘‘Identifying the determinants of corporate managers’ perceived obligations’’, Management Decision, Vol. 41, pp. 822-31.

Quazi, A. and O’Brien, D. (2000), ‘‘An empirical test of a cross-national model of corporate social responsibility’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 25, pp. 33-51.

Rugimbana, R., Quazi, A. and Keating, B. (2008), ‘‘Applying a consumer perceptual measure of corporate social responsibility’’, Journal of Corporate Citizenship, Vol. 29, pp. 61-74.

Sanchez, J.L. and Sotorrio, L. (2007), ‘‘The creation of value through corporate reputation’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 76, pp. 335-46.

Shen, C.-H. and Chang, Y. (2009), ‘‘Ambition versus conscience, does corporate social responsibility pay off? The application of matching methods’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 88, pp. 133-53.

Simerly, R.L. (1994), ‘‘Corporate social performance and firms’ financial performance: an alternative perspective’’, Psychological Reports, Vol. 75, pp. 1091-103.

Ullmann, A. (1985), ‘‘Data in search of a theory: a critical examination of the relationships among social performance, social disclosure and economic performance of US firms’’, Academy of Management Review, Vol. 10, pp. 758-69.

Vance, S. (1975), ‘‘Are socially responsible firms good investment risks?’’, Management Review, Vol. 64, pp. 18-24.

Vitell, S.J., Paolillo, J.G.P. and Thomas, J.L. (2003), ‘‘The perceived role of ethics and social responsibility: a study of marketing professionals’’, Business Ethics Quarterly, Vol. 13, pp. 63-86.

Wang, L. and Juslin, H. (2009), ‘‘The impact of Chinese culture on corporate social responsibility: the harmony approach’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 88, pp. 433-51.

Wood, D.J. and Jones, R.E. (1995), ‘‘Stakeholder mismatching: a theoretical problem in empirical research on corporate social performance’’, International Journal of Organisational Analysis, Vol. 3, pp. 229-67.

Wu, M.-L. (2006), ‘‘Corporate social performance, corporate financial performance, and firm size: a meta-analysis’’, Journal of the American Academy of Business, Cambridge, Vol. 8, pp. 163-71.

# Further reading

Abbott, W.F. and Monsen, J.R. (1979), ‘‘On the measurement of corporate social responsibility: self-reported disclosure as a method of measuring corporate social involvement’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 22, pp. 501-15.

Alexander, G.J. and Buchholz, R.A. (1978), ‘‘Corporate social performance and stock market performance’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 21, pp. 479-86.

Anderson, J.C. and Frankle, A.W. (1980), ‘‘Voluntary social reporting: an isobeta portfolio analysis’’, Accounting Review, Vol. 55, pp. 467-79.

Belkaoui, A. (1976), ‘‘The impact of the disclosure of the environmental effects of organisational behaviour on the market’’, Financial Management, Vol. 5, pp. 26-31.

Blackburn, V.L., Doran, M. and Shrader, C.B. (1994), ‘‘Investigating the dimensions of social responsibility and the consequences for corporate financial performance’’, Journal of Managerial Issues, Vol. 6, pp. 195-212.

Bowman, E.H. (1976), ‘‘Strategy and the weather’’, Sloan Management Review, Vol. 17, pp. 49-62.

# References

Bowman, E.H. (1978), ‘‘Strategy, annual reports, and alchemy’’, California Management Review, Vol. 20, pp. 64-71.

Bowman, E.H. and Haire, M. (1995), ‘‘Strategic posture towards corporate social responsibility’’, California Management Review, Vol. 18, pp. 49-58.

Bragdon, J.H. Jr and Marlin, J.A.T. (1972), ‘‘Is pollution proﬁtable?’’, Risk Management, Vol. 19, pp. 9-18.

Brown, B. and Perry, S. (1994), ‘‘Removing the ﬁnancial performance halo from Fortune’s ‘Most Admired’ companies’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 37, pp. 1346-59.

Brown, B. and Perry, S. (1995), ‘‘Halo-removed residuals of Fortune’s ‘Responsibility to the community and environment: a decade of data’’’, Business and Society, Vol. 34, pp. 199-215.

Chen, K.H. and Metcalf, R.W. (1980), ‘‘The relationship between pollution control record and ﬁnancial indicators revisited’’, Accounting Review, Vol. 55, pp. 168-77.

Conine, T.E. and Madden, G.P. (1987), ‘‘Corporate social responsibility and investment value: the expectational relationship’’, in Guth, W.D. (Ed.), Handbook of Business Strategy 1986/1987 Yearbook, Warren, Gorham and Lamont, Boston, MA, pp. 81-1-81-9.

Dooley, R.S. and Lerner, L.D. (1994), ‘‘Pollution, proﬁts and stakeholders: the constraining effect of economic performance on CEO concern with stakeholder expectations’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 13, pp. 701-11.

Fogler, H.R. and Nutt, F. (1975), ‘‘A note on social responsibility and stock valuation’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 18, pp. 155-60.

Fombrun, C. and Shanley, M. (1990), ‘‘What’s in a name? Reputation building and corporate strategy’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 33, pp. 233-58.

Freedman, M. and Jaggi, B. (1982), ‘‘Pollution disclosures, pollution performance and economic performance’’, Omega: The International Journal of Management Science, Vol. 10, pp. 167-76.

Freedman, M. and Jaggi, B. (1986), ‘‘An analysis of the impact of corporate pollution disclosures included in annual ﬁnancial statements on investors’ decisions’’, Advances Accounting, Vol. 1, pp. 192-212.

Graves, S.B. and Waddock, S.A. (1994), ‘‘Institutional owners and corporate social performance’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 37, pp. 1034-46.

Greening, D.W. (1995), ‘‘Conservation strategies, ﬁrm performance and corporate reputation in the US electric utility industry’’, in Post, J.E. (Ed.), Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy Supplement I, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 345-68.

Hansen, G.S. and Wernerfelt, B. (1989), ‘‘Determinants of ﬁrm performance: the relative importance of economic and organisational factors’’, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 10, pp. 399-411.

Heinze, D.C. (1976), ‘‘Financial correlates of a social involvement measure’’, Economic Review, Vol. 7, pp. 48-51.

Ingram, R.W. (1978), ‘‘An investigation of the information content of (certain) social responsibility disclosures’’, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 16, pp. 270-85.

Ingram, R.W. and Frazier, K.B. (1980), ‘‘Environmental performance and corporate disclosure’’, Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 18, pp. 614-22.

Jacobson, R. (1987), ‘‘The validity of ROI as a measure of business performance’’, American Economic Review, Vol. 77, pp. 470-8.

Kedia, B.L. and Kuntz, E.C. (1981), ‘‘The context of social performance: an empirical study of Texas banks’’, in Preston, L.E. (Ed.), Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Vol. 3, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 133-54.

Levy, F.K. and Shatto, G.M. (1980), ‘‘Social responsibility in large electricity utility ﬁrms: the case for philanthropy’’, in Preston, L.E. (Ed.), Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Vol. 2, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 237-49.

Long, W.F. and Ravenscraft, D.J. (1984), ‘‘The misuse of accounting rates of return: comment’’, American Economic Review, Vol. 74, pp. 494-501.

# References

Marcus, A.A. and Goodman, R.S. (1986), ‘‘Compliance and performance: toward a contingency theory’’, in Preston, L.E. (Ed.), Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Vol. 8, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 193-221.

Newgren, K.E., Rasher, M.E.L. and Szabo, M.R. (1985), ‘‘Environmental assessment and corporate performance: a longitudinal analysis using a market-determined performance measure’’, in Preston, L.E. (Ed.), Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Vol. 7, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 153-64.

Patten, D.M. (1990), ‘‘The market reaction to social responsibility disclosures: the case of the Sullivan Principles signings’’, Accounting, Organisations and Society, Vol. 15, pp. 575-87.

Preston, L.E. (1987), ‘‘Analysing corporate social performance: methods and results’’, Journal of Contemporary Business, Vol. 7, pp. 135-50.

Reimann, B.C. (1975), ‘‘Organisational effectiveness and management’s public values: a canonical analysis’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 18, pp. 224-41.

Riahi-Belkaoui, A. (1991), ‘‘Organisational effectiveness, social performance and economic performance’’, in Post, J.E. (Ed.), Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Vol. 12, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 143-53.

Roberts, R.W. (1992), ‘‘Determinants of corporate social responsibility disclosure: an application of stakeholder theory’’, Accounting, Organisations and Society, Vol. 17, pp. 595-612.

Russo, M.V. and Fouts, P.A. (1997), ‘‘A resource-based perspective on corporate environmental performance and profitability’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 40, pp. 534-59.

Shane, P.B. and Spicer, B.H. (1983), ‘‘Market response to environmental information produced outside the firm’’, Accounting Review, Vol. 58, pp. 521-38.

Sharfman, S. (1996), ‘‘A concurrent validity study of the KLD social performance ratings data’’, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 15, pp. 287-96.

Simerly, R.L. (1995), ‘‘Institutional ownership, corporate social performance and firms’ financial performance’’, Psychological Reports, Vol. 77, pp. 515-25.

Spencer, B.A. and Taylor, S.G. (1987), ‘‘A within and between analysis of the relationship between corporate social responsibility and financial performance’’, Akron Business and Economic Review, Vol. 18, pp. 7-18.

Spicer, B.H. (1978a), ‘‘Investors, corporate social performance and information disclosure: an empirical study’’, Accounting Review, Vol. 53, pp. 94-111.

Spicer, B.H. (1978b), ‘‘Market risk, accounting data and companies’ pollution control records’’, Journal of Business, Finance and Accounting, Vol. 5, pp. 67-83.

Starik, M. (1990), ‘‘Stakeholder management and firm performance: reputation and financial relationships to US electric utility consumer-related strategies’’, unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Georgia, Athens, GA.

Sturdivant, F.D. and Ginter, J.L. (1977), ‘‘Corporate social responsiveness: management attitudes and economic performance’’, California Management Review, Vol. 19, pp. 30-9.

Turban, D.B. and Greening, D.W. (1990), ‘‘Corporate social performance and organisational attractiveness to prospective employees’’, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 40, pp. 658-72.

Venkatraman, N. and Ramanujan, V. (1987), ‘‘Measurement of business economic performance: an examination of method convergence’’, Journal of Management, Vol. 13, pp. 109-22.

Waddock, S.A. and Graves, S.B. (1997), ‘‘The corporate social performance-financial performance link’’, Strategic Management Journal, Vol. 18, pp. 303-19.

Wartick, S.L. (1988), ‘‘How issues management contributes to corporate performance’’, Business Forum, Vol. 13, pp. 16-22.

Wiseman, J. (1982), ‘‘An evaluation of environmental disclosures made in corporate annual reports’’, Accounting, Organisations and Society, Vol. 7, pp. 53-63.

Woktuch, R.E. and Spencer, B.A. (1987), ‘‘Corporate sinners and saints: the effects of philanthropic and illegal activity on organisational performance’’, California Management Review, Vol. 29, pp. 62-77.

Wolfe, R. (1991), ‘‘The use of content analysis to assess corporate social responsibility’’, in Post, J.E. (Ed.), Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy, Vol. 12, JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 281-307.

# About the authors

Dr Ali Quazi is an Associate Professor of Marketing within the Faculty of Business and Government at the University of Canberra, Australia. He received his PhD from the University of New South Wales, Australia. His research interests are in the areas of corporate social responsibility, relationship/services marketing, cross-cultural marketing and innovation management. His articles have appeared in leading international journals including European Journal of Marketing, Journal of Marketing Management, Electronic Markets, Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, Journal of Environment Management and Journal of Business Ethics.

Dr Alice Richardson is an Assistant Professor of Statistics within the Faculty of Information Sciences and Engineering at the University of Canberra, Australia. She received her PhD from the Australian National University, Australia. Her research interests are in the areas of linear modelling and statistical analysis in a variety of disciplines including business and corporate social responsibility, health and education. She has published in a number of journals including Journal of the American Statistical Association, and Journal of Institutional Research. Alice Richardson is the corresponding author and can be contacted at: alice.richardson@canberra.edu.au

To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints

PAGE 256 jSOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY JOURNAL j VOL. 8 NO. 2 2012

# This article has been cited by:

1. Mehran Nejati, Azlan Amran, Noor Hazlina Ahmad. 2014. Examining stakeholders’ influence on environmental responsibility of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises and its outcomes. Management Decision 52:10, 2021-2043. [Abstract] [Full Text] [PDF]
2. Paula Caligiuri, Ahsiya Mencin, Kaifeng Jiang. 2013. Win-Win-Win: The Influence of Company-Sponsored Volunteerism Programs on Employees, NGOs, and Business Units. Personnel Psychology 66:4, 825-860. [CrossRef]
3. María del Mar Miras-Rodríguez, Amalia Carrasco-Gallego, Bernabé Escobar-Pérez. 2013. Are Socially Responsible Behaviors Paid Off Equally? A Cross-cultural Analysis. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management n/a-n/a. [CrossRef]

Downloaded by MAHIDOL UNIVERSITY At 22:36 10 February 2015 (PT)